feat(thanos): adding initial plugin (#183)
cloudoperators/greenhouse-extensions: thanos/README.md

---
title: Thanos
---

# Information

This plugin deploys the following Thanos components:

* Query
<!--* Query Frontend-->
* Compact
<!--* (Ruler)-->
<!--* Storegateway-->

Requirements (detailed steps below):
* ready to use credentials for a [compatible object store](https://thanos.io/tip/thanos/storage.md/)

> * thanos-sidecar enabled in Prometheus (usually with [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/))

Reviewer: Pointing to the ThanosSpec directly.
```suggestion
* thanos-sidecar enabled in Prometheus (usually with [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/api-reference/api/#monitoring.coreos.com/v1.ThanosSpec))
```

# Owner

1. Tommy Sauer (@viennaa) 
2. Richard Tief (@richardtief) 
3. Martin Vossen (@artherd42) 

# Configuration

## Object Store preparation

> To run thanos you need object store credentials. Choose a provider and add the credentials into a secret. The [Thanos documentation](https://thanos.io/tip/thanos/storage.md/) provides a great overview on the different supported store types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run Thanos, you need object storage credentials. Get the credentials of your provider and add them to a Kubernetes Secret. The [Thanos documentation](https://thanos.io/tip/thanos/storage.md/) provides a great overview on the different supported store types.
```

Usually this looks somewhat like this

```yaml
type: $STORAGE_TYPE
config:
    user:
    password:
    domain:
    ...
```

If you've got everything in a file, deploy it in your remote cluster in the namespace, where Prometheus and Thanos will be.

**Important:** `$THANOS_PLUGIN_NAME` is needed later for the respective Thanos plugin and they must not be different!

```
kubectl create secret generic $THANOS_PLUGIN_NAME-metrics-objectstore --from-file=thanos.yaml=/path/to/your/file
```

## kube-monitoring plugin enablement 

> Prometheus in kube-monitoring needs to be altered to have a sidecar and ship metrics to the new object store too. You have to provide the secret you've just created to the (most likely already existing) kube-monitoring plugin. Add this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus in kube-monitoring needs to be altered to have a sidecar and ship metrics to the new object store too. You have to provide the Secret you've just created to the (most likely already existing) kube-monitoring plugin. Add this:
```

```yaml
spec:
    optionValues:
      - name: kubeMonitoring.prometheus.prometheusSpec.thanos.objectStorageConfig.existingSecret.key
        value: thanos.yaml
      - name: kubeMonitoring.prometheus.prometheusSpec.thanos.objectStorageConfig.existingSecret.name
        value: $THANOS_PLUGIN_NAME-metrics-objectstore
```

## Thanos Querier

This is the real deal now: Define your Thanos query by creating a plugin.

**NOTE1:** `$THANOS_PLUGIN_NAME` needs to be consistent with your secret created earlier.
**NOTE2:** The `releaseNamespace` needs to be the same as to where kube-monitoring resides. By default this is kube-monitoring. 

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

apiVersion: greenhouse.sap/v1alpha1
kind: Plugin
metadata:
  name: $YOUR_CLUSTER_NAME
spec:
  pluginDefinition: thanos
  disabled: false
  clusterName: $YOUR_CLUSTER_NAME 
  releaseNamespace: kube-monitoring
```

## [OPTIONAL] Handling your Prometheus Store

> By default Thanos Query would check for a service `prometheus-operated` in the same namespace with this GRPC port to be available `10901`. The cli option looks like this and is configured in the PluginDefinition:

Reviewer: Nice!
